Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md, before:

---
title: Object Store CRD
---

Rook allows creation and customization of object stores through the custom resource definitions (CRDs). The following settings are available for Ceph object stores.

## Example

### Erasure Coded

Erasure coded pools can only be used with `dataPools`. The `metadataPool` must use a replicated pool.

!!! note
    This sample requires *at least 3 bluestore OSDs*, with each OSD located on a *different node*.

The OSDs must be located on different nodes, because the [`failureDomain`](../Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md#spec) is set to `host` and the `erasureCoded` chunk settings require at least 3 different OSDs (2 `dataChunks` + 1 `codingChunks`).

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephObjectStore
metadata:
  name: my-store
  namespace: rook-ceph
spec:
  metadataPool:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
  dataPool:
    failureDomain: host
    erasureCoded:
      dataChunks: 2
      codingChunks: 1
  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
  gateway:
    # sslCertificateRef:
    # caBundleRef:
    port: 80
    # securePort: 443
    instances: 1
    # A key/value list of annotations
    annotations:
    #  key: value
    placement:
    #  nodeAffinity:
    #    requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
    #      nodeSelectorTerms:
    #      - matchExpressions:
    #        - key: role
    #          operator: In
    #          values:
    #          - rgw-node
    #  tolerations:
    #  - key: rgw-node
    #    operator: Exists
    #  podAffinity:
    #  podAntiAffinity:
    #  topologySpreadConstraints:
    resources:
    #  limits:
    #    cpu: "500m"
    #    memory: "1024Mi"
    #  requests:
    #    cpu: "500m"
    #    memory: "1024Mi"
  #zone:
    #name: zone-a
```

## Object Store Settings

### Metadata

* `name`: The name of the object store to create, which will be reflected in the pool and other resource names.
* `namespace`: The namespace of the Rook cluster where the object store is created.

### Pools

The pools allow all of the settings defined in the Pool CRD spec. For more details, see the [Pool CRD](../Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md) settings. In the example above, there must be at least three hosts (size 3) and at least three devices (2 data + 1 coding chunks) in the cluster.

When the `zone` section is set pools with the object stores name will not be created since the object-store will the using the pools created by the ceph-object-zone.

* `metadataPool`: The settings used to create all of the object store metadata pools. Must use replication.
* `dataPool`: The settings to create the object store data pool. Can use replication or erasure coding.
* `preservePoolsOnDelete`: If it is set to 'true' the pools used to support the object store will remain when the object store will be deleted. This is a security measure to avoid accidental loss of data. It is set to 'false' by default. If not specified is also deemed as 'false'.

## Gateway Settings

The gateway settings correspond to the RGW daemon settings.

* `type`: `S3` is supported
* `sslCertificateRef`: If specified, this is the name of the Kubernetes secret(`opaque` or `tls`
  type) that contains the TLS certificate to be used for secure connections to the object store.
  If it is an opaque Kubernetes Secret, Rook will look in the secret provided at the `cert` key name. The value of the `cert` key must be
  in the format expected by the [RGW
  service](https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/install/ceph-deploy/install-ceph-gateway/#using-ssl-with-civetweb):
  "The server key, server certificate, and any other CA or intermediate certificates be supplied in
  one file. Each of these items must be in PEM form." They are scenarios where the certificate DNS is set for a particular domain
  that does not include the local Kubernetes DNS, namely the object store DNS service endpoint. If
  adding the service DNS name to the certificate is not empty another key can be specified in the
  secret's data: `insecureSkipVerify: true` to skip the certificate verification. It is not
  recommended to enable this option since TLS is susceptible to machine-in-the-middle attacks unless
  custom verification is used.
* `caBundleRef`: If specified, this is the name of the Kubernetes secret (type `opaque`) that
  contains additional custom ca-bundle to use. The secret must be in the same namespace as the Rook
  cluster. Rook will look in the secret provided at the `cabundle` key name.
* `port`: The port on which the Object service will be reachable. If host networking is enabled, the RGW daemons will also listen on that port. If running on SDN, the RGW daemon listening port will be 8080 internally.
* `securePort`: The secure port on which RGW pods will be listening. A TLS certificate must be specified either via `sslCerticateRef` or `service.annotations`
* `instances`: The number of pods that will be started to load balance this object store.
* `externalRgwEndpoints`: A list of IP addresses to connect to external existing Rados Gateways (works with external mode). This setting will be ignored if the `CephCluster` does not have `external` spec enabled. Refer to the [external cluster section](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#external-cluster) for more details.
* `annotations`: Key value pair list of annotations to add.
* `labels`: Key value pair list of labels to add.
* `placement`: The Kubernetes placement settings to determine where the RGW pods should be started in the cluster.
* `resources`: Set resource requests/limits for the Gateway Pod(s), see [Resource Requirements/Limits](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#resource-requirementslimits).
* `priorityClassName`: Set priority class name for the Gateway Pod(s)
* `service`: The annotations to set on to the Kubernetes Service of RGW. The [service serving cert](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/security/certificates/service-serving-certificate.html) feature supported in Openshift is enabled by the following example:

```yaml
gateway:
  service:
    annotations:
      service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: <name of TLS secret for automatic generation>
```

Example of external rgw endpoints to connect to:

```yaml
gateway:
  port: 80
  externalRgwEndpoints:
    - ip: 192.168.39.182
```

This will create a service with the endpoint `192.168.39.182` on port `80`, pointing to the Ceph object external gateway.
All the other settings from the gateway section will be ignored, except for `securePort`.

## Zone Settings

The [zone](../../Storage-Configuration/Object-Storage-RGW/ceph-object-multisite.md) settings allow the object store to join custom created [ceph-object-zone](ceph-object-multisite-crd.md).

* `name`: the name of the ceph-object-zone the object store will be in.
* `endpoint`: the zone endpoint associated with the object-store. See description below.

### Zone Endpoint Description
A Zone has a list of endpoints (zone endpoints) of each CephObjectStore in the zone. Each of these endpoints support replication traffic for the zone.

A zone endpoint must be a reachable endpoint of the CephObjectStore from the other Ceph cluster the admin is establishing a multisite relationship from.
If the admin doesn't set an `endpoint`, the ClusterIP Service created for the object-store by Rook is used as the zone endpoint for the CephObjectStore.

Since a CephObjectStore can be reachable via a variety of means, the zone endpoint for a CephObjectStore is one way to reach a CephObjectStore but with the purpose of supporting replication traffic.
For example, if an admin creates a LoadBalancer Service for ingress to the CephObjectStore's RGWs for multisite, the `endpoint` should be set to the IP or DNS name of the LoadBalancer.

## Runtime settings

### MIME types

Rook provides a default `mime.types` file for each Ceph object store. This file is stored in a
Kubernetes ConfigMap with the name `rook-ceph-rgw-<STORE-NAME>-mime-types`. For most users, the
default file should suffice, however, the option is available to users to edit the `mime.types`
file in the ConfigMap as they desire. Users may have their own special file types, and particularly
security conscious users may wish to pare down the file to reduce the possibility of a file type
execution attack.

Rook will not overwrite an existing `mime.types` ConfigMap so that user modifications will not be
destroyed. If the object store is destroyed and recreated, the ConfigMap will also be destroyed and
created anew.

## Health settings

Rook-Ceph will be default monitor the state of the object store endpoints.
The following CRD settings are available:

* `healthCheck`: main object store health monitoring section
  * `bucket`: Rook checks that the object store is usable regularly. This is explained in more
    detail below. Use this config to disable or change the interval at which Rook verifies the
    object store connectivity.
  * `startupProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway startup probe.
  * `livenessProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway liveness probe.
  * `readinessProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway readiness probe.

Here is a complete example:

```yaml
healthCheck:
  bucket:
    disabled: false
    interval: 60s
  startupProbe:
    disabled: false
  livenessProbe:
    disabled: false
    periodSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 4
  readinessProbe:
    disabled: false
    periodSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 2
```

The endpoint health check procedure is the following:

1. Create an S3 user
2. Create a bucket with that user
3. PUT the file in the object store
4. GET the file from the object store
5. Verify object consistency
6. Update CR health status check

Rook-Ceph always keeps the bucket and the user for the health check, it just does a PUT and GET of an s3 object since creating a bucket is an expensive operation.

## Security settings

Ceph RGW supports encryption via Key Management System (KMS) using HashiCorp Vault. Refer to the [vault kms section](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#vault-kms) for detailed explanation.
If these settings are defined, then RGW establish a connection between Vault and whenever S3 client sends a request with Server Side Encryption,
it encrypts that using the key specified by the client. For more details w.r.t RGW, please refer [Ceph Vault documentation](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/vault/)

The `security` section contains settings related to KMS encryption of the RGW.

```yaml
security:
  kms:
    connectionDetails:
      KMS_PROVIDER: vault
      VAULT_ADDR: http://vault.default.svc.cluster.local:8200
      VAULT_BACKEND_PATH: rgw
      VAULT_SECRET_ENGINE: kv
      VAULT_BACKEND: v2
    # name of the k8s secret containing the kms authentication token
    tokenSecretName: rgw-vault-token
```

For RGW, please note the following:

* `VAULT_SECRET_ENGINE` option is specifically for RGW to mention about the secret engine which can be used, currently supports two: [kv](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kv) and [transit](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/transit). And for kv engine only version 2 is supported.
* The Storage administrator needs to create a secret in the Vault server so that S3 clients use that key for encryption

```console
vault kv put rook/<mybucketkey> key=$(openssl rand -base64 32) # kv engine
vault write -f transit/keys/<mybucketkey> exportable=true # transit engine
```

* TLS authentication with custom certificates between Vault and CephObjectStore RGWs are supported from ceph v16.2.6 onwards

## Deleting a CephObjectStore

During deletion of a CephObjectStore resource, Rook protects against accidental or premature
destruction of user data by blocking deletion if there are any object buckets in the object store
being deleted. Buckets may have been created by users or by ObjectBucketClaims.

For deletion to be successful, all buckets in the object store must be removed. This may require
manual deletion or removal of all ObjectBucketClaims. Alternately, the
`cephobjectstore.ceph.rook.io` finalizer on the CephObjectStore can be removed to remove the
Kubernetes Custom Resource, but the Ceph pools which store the data will not be removed in this case.

Rook will warn about which buckets are blocking deletion in three ways:

1. An event will be registered on the CephObjectStore resource
1. A status condition will be added to the CephObjectStore resource
1. An error will be added to the Rook-Ceph Operator log

Commit message:

ceph: addressing comments from previous commit
Updated the description, unti test cases etc.

Signed-off-by: Jiffin Tony Thottan <thottanjiffin@gmail.com>

Documentation/CRDs/Object-Storage/ceph-object-store-crd.md, after:

---
title: Object Store CRD
---

Rook allows creation and customization of object stores through the custom resource definitions (CRDs). The following settings are available for Ceph object stores.

## Example

### Erasure Coded

Erasure coded pools can only be used with `dataPools`. The `metadataPool` must use a replicated pool.

!!! note
    This sample requires *at least 3 bluestore OSDs*, with each OSD located on a *different node*.

The OSDs must be located on different nodes, because the [`failureDomain`](../Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md#spec) is set to `host` and the `erasureCoded` chunk settings require at least 3 different OSDs (2 `dataChunks` + 1 `codingChunks`).

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephObjectStore
metadata:
  name: my-store
  namespace: rook-ceph
spec:
  metadataPool:
    failureDomain: host
    replicated:
      size: 3
  dataPool:
    failureDomain: host
    erasureCoded:
      dataChunks: 2
      codingChunks: 1
  preservePoolsOnDelete: true
  gateway:
    # sslCertificateRef:
    # caBundleRef:
    port: 80
    # securePort: 443
    instances: 1
    # A key/value list of annotations
    annotations:
    #  key: value
    placement:
    #  nodeAffinity:
    #    requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
    #      nodeSelectorTerms:
    #      - matchExpressions:
    #        - key: role
    #          operator: In
    #          values:
    #          - rgw-node
    #  tolerations:
    #  - key: rgw-node
    #    operator: Exists
    #  podAffinity:
    #  podAntiAffinity:
    #  topologySpreadConstraints:
    resources:
    #  limits:
    #    cpu: "500m"
    #    memory: "1024Mi"
    #  requests:
    #    cpu: "500m"
    #    memory: "1024Mi"
  #zone:
    #name: zone-a
```

## Object Store Settings

### Metadata

* `name`: The name of the object store to create, which will be reflected in the pool and other resource names.
* `namespace`: The namespace of the Rook cluster where the object store is created.

### Pools

The pools allow all of the settings defined in the Pool CRD spec. For more details, see the [Pool CRD](../Block-Storage/ceph-block-pool-crd.md) settings. In the example above, there must be at least three hosts (size 3) and at least three devices (2 data + 1 coding chunks) in the cluster.

When the `zone` section is set pools with the object stores name will not be created since the object-store will the using the pools created by the ceph-object-zone.

* `metadataPool`: The settings used to create all of the object store metadata pools. Must use replication.
* `dataPool`: The settings to create the object store data pool. Can use replication or erasure coding.
* `preservePoolsOnDelete`: If it is set to 'true' the pools used to support the object store will remain when the object store will be deleted. This is a security measure to avoid accidental loss of data. It is set to 'false' by default. If not specified is also deemed as 'false'.

## Gateway Settings

The gateway settings correspond to the RGW daemon settings.

* `type`: `S3` is supported
* `sslCertificateRef`: If specified, this is the name of the Kubernetes secret(`opaque` or `tls`
  type) that contains the TLS certificate to be used for secure connections to the object store.
  If it is an opaque Kubernetes Secret, Rook will look in the secret provided at the `cert` key name. The value of the `cert` key must be
  in the format expected by the [RGW
  service](https://docs.ceph.com/docs/master/install/ceph-deploy/install-ceph-gateway/#using-ssl-with-civetweb):
  "The server key, server certificate, and any other CA or intermediate certificates be supplied in
  one file. Each of these items must be in PEM form." They are scenarios where the certificate DNS is set for a particular domain
  that does not include the local Kubernetes DNS, namely the object store DNS service endpoint. If
  adding the service DNS name to the certificate is not empty another key can be specified in the
  secret's data: `insecureSkipVerify: true` to skip the certificate verification. It is not
  recommended to enable this option since TLS is susceptible to machine-in-the-middle attacks unless
  custom verification is used.
* `caBundleRef`: If specified, this is the name of the Kubernetes secret (type `opaque`) that
  contains additional custom ca-bundle to use. The secret must be in the same namespace as the Rook
  cluster. Rook will look in the secret provided at the `cabundle` key name.
* `port`: The port on which the Object service will be reachable. If host networking is enabled, the RGW daemons will also listen on that port. If running on SDN, the RGW daemon listening port will be 8080 internally.
* `securePort`: The secure port on which RGW pods will be listening. A TLS certificate must be specified either via `sslCerticateRef` or `service.annotations`
* `instances`: The number of pods that will be started to load balance this object store.
* `externalRgwEndpoints`: A list of IP addresses to connect to external existing Rados Gateways (works with external mode). This setting will be ignored if the `CephCluster` does not have `external` spec enabled. Refer to the [external cluster section](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#external-cluster) for more details.
* `annotations`: Key value pair list of annotations to add.
* `labels`: Key value pair list of labels to add.
* `placement`: The Kubernetes placement settings to determine where the RGW pods should be started in the cluster.
* `resources`: Set resource requests/limits for the Gateway Pod(s), see [Resource Requirements/Limits](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#resource-requirementslimits).
* `priorityClassName`: Set priority class name for the Gateway Pod(s)
* `service`: The annotations to set on to the Kubernetes Service of RGW. The [service serving cert](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.6/security/certificates/service-serving-certificate.html) feature supported in Openshift is enabled by the following example:

```yaml
gateway:
  service:
    annotations:
      service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name: <name of TLS secret for automatic generation>
```

Example of external rgw endpoints to connect to:

```yaml
gateway:
  port: 80
  externalRgwEndpoints:
    - ip: 192.168.39.182
```

This will create a service with the endpoint `192.168.39.182` on port `80`, pointing to the Ceph object external gateway.
All the other settings from the gateway section will be ignored, except for `securePort`.

## Zone Settings

The [zone](../../Storage-Configuration/Object-Storage-RGW/ceph-object-multisite.md) settings allow the object store to join custom created [ceph-object-zone](ceph-object-multisite-crd.md).

* `name`: the name of the ceph-object-zone the object store will be in.
* `endpoint`: if this zone cannot be accessed from other peer Ceph clusters via the ClusterIP Service endpoint created by Rook, you must set this to the externally reachable endpoint. You must also include the port in the definition. For example: "https://my-object-store.my-domain.net:443".In many cases, you should set this to the endpoint of the ingress resource that makes the CephObjectStore associated with this CephObjectStoreZone reachable to peer clusters.

## Runtime settings

### MIME types

Rook provides a default `mime.types` file for each Ceph object store. This file is stored in a
Kubernetes ConfigMap with the name `rook-ceph-rgw-<STORE-NAME>-mime-types`. For most users, the
default file should suffice, however, the option is available to users to edit the `mime.types`
file in the ConfigMap as they desire. Users may have their own special file types, and particularly
security conscious users may wish to pare down the file to reduce the possibility of a file type
execution attack.

Rook will not overwrite an existing `mime.types` ConfigMap so that user modifications will not be
destroyed. If the object store is destroyed and recreated, the ConfigMap will also be destroyed and
created anew.

## Health settings

Rook-Ceph will be default monitor the state of the object store endpoints.
The following CRD settings are available:

* `healthCheck`: main object store health monitoring section
  * `bucket`: Rook checks that the object store is usable regularly. This is explained in more
    detail below. Use this config to disable or change the interval at which Rook verifies the
    object store connectivity.
  * `startupProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway startup probe.
  * `livenessProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway liveness probe.
  * `readinessProbe`: Disable, or override timing and threshold values of the object gateway readiness probe.

Here is a complete example:

```yaml
healthCheck:
  bucket:
    disabled: false
    interval: 60s
  startupProbe:
    disabled: false
  livenessProbe:
    disabled: false
    periodSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 4
  readinessProbe:
    disabled: false
    periodSeconds: 5
    failureThreshold: 2
```

The endpoint health check procedure is the following:

1. Create an S3 user
2. Create a bucket with that user
3. PUT the file in the object store
4. GET the file from the object store
5. Verify object consistency
6. Update CR health status check

Rook-Ceph always keeps the bucket and the user for the health check, it just does a PUT and GET of an s3 object since creating a bucket is an expensive operation.

## Security settings

Ceph RGW supports encryption via Key Management System (KMS) using HashiCorp Vault. Refer to the [vault kms section](../Cluster/ceph-cluster-crd.md#vault-kms) for detailed explanation.
If these settings are defined, then RGW establish a connection between Vault and whenever S3 client sends a request with Server Side Encryption,
it encrypts that using the key specified by the client. For more details w.r.t RGW, please refer [Ceph Vault documentation](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/radosgw/vault/)

The `security` section contains settings related to KMS encryption of the RGW.

```yaml
security:
  kms:
    connectionDetails:
      KMS_PROVIDER: vault
      VAULT_ADDR: http://vault.default.svc.cluster.local:8200
      VAULT_BACKEND_PATH: rgw
      VAULT_SECRET_ENGINE: kv
      VAULT_BACKEND: v2
    # name of the k8s secret containing the kms authentication token
    tokenSecretName: rgw-vault-token
```

For RGW, please note the following:

* `VAULT_SECRET_ENGINE` option is specifically for RGW to mention about the secret engine which can be used, currently supports two: [kv](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/kv) and [transit](https://www.vaultproject.io/docs/secrets/transit). And for kv engine only version 2 is supported.
* The Storage administrator needs to create a secret in the Vault server so that S3 clients use that key for encryption

```console
vault kv put rook/<mybucketkey> key=$(openssl rand -base64 32) # kv engine
vault write -f transit/keys/<mybucketkey> exportable=true # transit engine
```

* TLS authentication with custom certificates between Vault and CephObjectStore RGWs are supported from ceph v16.2.6 onwards

## Deleting a CephObjectStore

During deletion of a CephObjectStore resource, Rook protects against accidental or premature
destruction of user data by blocking deletion if there are any object buckets in the object store
being deleted. Buckets may have been created by users or by ObjectBucketClaims.

For deletion to be successful, all buckets in the object store must be removed. This may require
manual deletion or removal of all ObjectBucketClaims. Alternately, the
`cephobjectstore.ceph.rook.io` finalizer on the CephObjectStore can be removed to remove the
Kubernetes Custom Resource, but the Ceph pools which store the data will not be removed in this case.

Rook will warn about which buckets are blocking deletion in three ways:

1. An event will be registered on the CephObjectStore resource
1. A status condition will be added to the CephObjectStore resource
1. An error will be added to the Rook-Ceph Operator log
